so good afternoon everybody this is
another in my
once around series of talks once around
barnard's star this time
barnard star is a small
red star that lots of people have heard
of despite its
relative obscurity and uh there's a lot
of been a lot of mystery
about it over the years um it tends to
be commented a lot
in uh various textbooks and so on so
let's just
start off with showing you where it is
and it's in the
uh almost unheard of constellation of
ophiuchus
which is the 13th constellation of the
zodiac
through which the planets pass and the
one that the uh astrologers all ignore
this one down here
underneath hercules so low in the south
during the summer um and you can see
marked on the map here with a little
ring
this is the position of barnard's star
and
as i say a very obscure star it's
only magnitude 9.5
the lowest magnitude that you can see
with the naked eye is magnitude
6 and the brightest stars at first
magnitude
magnitude one each step corresponds to a
factor of two and a half
for historical reasons in the way it was
set up and defined
and so this is three and a half of those
steps below
visibility it was discovered and is now
named
after edward emerson barnard pictured
here
with the business end of the
inch reflector sorry 36 inch
refractor at the lick observatory
the second largest lens based refractor
telescope
ever built the largest was the 40 inch
at yerkes
near chicago but this one's on mount
hamilton above the
hills surrounding silicon valley and
i've had the
privilege of going and visiting it a
couple of times it's a magnificent piece
of equipment
so what's all the fuss about about this
this
magnitude 9.5 star well
barnard noticed that it was changing its
position
moving across the sky it was doing this
back in
1916 he took a series of photographs
and realized that the position was
changing
and doing so very quickly indeed you can
see a little animation
on the screen there of the position of
barnard's star
with the date beside it going from 1985
to 2005 and back again so 20 year period
moving in chunks across the sky there
pictured every five years
barnard measured it as moving 10.3 arc
seconds
every year which doesn't sound like very
much
but for a star in the sky that normally
seem to be fixed that's uh a lot and
it's a record holder still to this day
it's moving across our field of view
from here on earth
faster than any other known star
and you can see it works at a quarter of
a degree in a human lifespan
so it's enough that you would notice it
maybe if you were
looking at it and mapping it with
any reasonable duration of a series of
observations
now the reason that stars like this one
seem to move so quickly
is either because they're moving very
fast or because they're quite nearby
and in this case it is clearly a nearby
star
the distance was measured fairly
straightforwardly
using the parallax system you take two
lines of sight from
opposing positions of the earth in its
orbit
uh six months apart and you will see
that the position
seems to change relative to the stars in
the background
now you can do that work out the
parallax angle and with a simple bit of
trigonometry because you've now got
a nice isosceles triangle you know the
angle and you know the base
so you can work out the height and you
come out with
a distance of six light years
roughly and that makes it the second
closest
star to the sun or the fourth closest
if you count the alpha centauri system
as being three stars which i suppose we
could
but it's the second closest system to
the sun
in terms of uh human units we can glibly
talk about things like six light years
as as not very far
but i just wanted to illustrate it it's
uh each light year is 10
trillion kilometers which is 6 trillion
miles and
a trillion doesn't sound too
mean very much to most people i suspect
but if you drove on an interstellar
highway that somebody had built
to barnard's star and you managed to
drive
30 000 miles every year it would take
you 200 million years
to get there and if your car's
engine was uh super reliable and managed
a million miles before each engine
replacement you'd get through six
million engines
so it's a ridiculously long distance
the fastest spacecraft ever launched i
worked out was
would take 175 000 years
to get there so even traveling at the
sort of speeds of
things like voyager and new horizons
out into the interstellar realm now
uh you're still going to take hundreds
of thousands of years to cover the
distance
here's a little map of the local area
with the sun in the middle
we've talked on previous occasions about
the oort cloud
which is really the limit of the extent
of the influence of the sun
and the cometary bodies that orbit
around it
that's around about one light year two
light years
four light years you're still just about
to get to
proxima centauri at 4.24
and uh the rest of the alpha centauri
system over there
but barnard stark over here six light
years
comes second just beyond that distance
we do get a few more objects we've got
these two here
with their wise numbers these are brown
dwarfs
so they're smaller even than red dwarf
stars and they're
failed stars they're not massive enough
to begin their nuclear fusion and
there's another one over here in the
sort of six to eight light year bracket
so there are a few of these others but
we've not discovered anything closer
than barnard's star since 1916
and proxima centauri in 1917 in fact
one year later
now of course this is not a static thing
because all the stars are making their
own
orbits around the galaxy and
at the moment it so happens that on this
chart we are
here on the dotted blue line and proxima
centauri
in the uh alpha centauri system is the
nearest
star to us followed by the alpha and
alpha one now for two stars
and then barnard star is the second
closest out here but as you can see
barnard's star is approaching us
quite fast we can look at the spectrum
of the light
measure the amount of shift in the
emission and absorption lines in the
spectrum
and we see a quite a big blue shift
overall
which is telling us it's coming towards
us at 110
kilometers per second and if we run that
forward
and extrapolate we see that in
11 000
years time barnard's star is going to
become
just 3.75 light years from us
and then it's going to start receding
again but it still won't overtake
proxima as the record holder because
proxima is also approaching us
slightly more slowly and it doesn't
quite catch up
you can see some of the others that are
going to swing past
near approaches to the sun and you can
see that alpha centauri is going to
start receding from us
and in fact proxima is in orbit around
the alpha centauri system
and we'll switch places and become
further away than the other two
around about where the mouse pointer is
here in 25 000
years time and a star called ross248
eventually takes over for a short while
as being the nearest
now even when barnard star does get to
3.75
light years from us you still won't be
able to see it
it's going to be magnitude eight and a
half then so one magnitude brighter
but still more than two magnitudes
fainter than will be visible with the
naked eye
so we're just not going to see any of
these except for alpha centauri which is
a
much more powerful bright star like the
sun
barnard's star itself though it's an m4
class red dwarf star
um that's a medium-sized red dwarf
temperature 3100 kelvin so
quite a lot cooler than the sun and see
the temperature of the sun there
and just 14 of the sun's mass
the minimum for a red dwarf to undergo
any nuclear fusion in its core at all is
seven and a half percent of the
mass of the sun so it's it's double that
minimum mass so there's no danger of it
failing and being a brown dwarf
but it's very very much fainter one two
thousand five hundredth
of the mess as or sorry of the
luminosity of the sun
rotates in 130 days on its axis
we can see that but again
spectroscopically we can look at the
rotation and we can also note
that quite a few active stellar flares
on it
although it seems to have gone quiet
since 2005
and it's perhaps having a a period
rather like the maunder minimum
on the sun where there were no sun spots
for about 100 years
it seems to have gone very very quiet
indeed
it's very noticeable that the smaller
these stars are the longer they take to
rotate
you can compare 130 days here with the
26 days that the sun takes
and just to give you a sense of scale
visually
here's the sun in just a quarter of it
compared to barnard's star and the
planet jupiter
you can see barnard stars a little
bigger than jupiter
but a lot smaller than the sun in terms
of radius
now we have its position on the very
famous hertzsprung russell diagram that
classifies stars
according to brightness and temperature
and
you can see here is barnard's star down
here
and it's a red dwarf in this
tale of the main sequence here burning
hydrogen
converting it to helium in its core um
and the hotter the stars get the more
massive they are
the hotter they are and the faster they
burn their fuel until you get to the sun
up here there's a yellow dwarf star so
we've gone through the orange
colored stars to the yellow ones and
then on up the main sequence through the
white stars
and up to the blue stars right at the
top here the real monsters that took the
powerhouses
the ones at the top right are the aging
giants where
they've run out of hydrogen to burn the
helium in the core
and have gone on to using uh other
nuclear fusion processes to power
themselves
but barnard star will never do that it
will never
uh really get much beyond the size it is
now
these little tiny red dwarfs we think
that they uh
die in a different way
in fact though no red dwarf star has
ever
died because their lifetime is around
about 1 trillion years
and that's a thousand billion which
is a lot longer than the current age of
the universe which is only 13.8 billion
the reason being they run very very
slowly and efficiently
at a low temperature burning their
hydrogen very slowly
and they burn all of it they have a
fully convective
core and a fully convective outer
layer that mixes all the material in the
star
so all of their mass is available to
them
for the process of fusion that's not the
case with larger stars like the sun
where the outer layers don't efficiently
mix
with the core at all and so the sun
it will only use about a tenth of its
available fuel
before uh it swells up into a red giant
and goes on its
other evolutionary processes to to
its eventual death
we think that eventually this will use
up all of its hydrogen
and become a ball of helium
it doesn't have the mass to create the
pressure and temperature
to start burning the helium at all and
so it'll just
end its days cooling down as a helium
white dwarf
just as an illustration of how common
red dwarf stars are this is
an estimated chart of
the abundance of different types of
stars
by temperature and color so you can see
the vast majority
over three quarters of all stars are red
dwarfs
then there's another 12 in the orange k
type stars
before we get to the uh orangey uh
yellow ones likes the sun just uh
uh 7.6 percent the ones slightly hotter
than the sun the f-type stars three
percent
and hardly any of the uh white and blue
stars now this is a double whammy really
firstly nature finds it much easier to
build a small star than a big one
so a lot more small stars are formed
than large ones
it's just so much easier to get all the
material together
secondly because they liver such long
lives they stick around
in the case of red dwarfs essentially
forever
whereas the other stars go through their
life and disappear
and the larger they are the more rapidly
they do so
so the o type stars only live for a
million years so
the total population of them is
constantly
being regenerated and then disappearing
and needing
to be regenerated again so in any given
instant
a snapshot in time you just see the
current set of o
type stars as opposed to the red dwarfs
which are all the red dwarfs which have
ever been formed
so barnard's star has always been the
subject
of mystery because of the possibility
of detecting planets around it
now as i've said it is a very old star
it's estimated somewhere in the range 8
to 12
billion years old and it doesn't
have very much by the way of elements
beyond helium
in it it won't form any it was
only therefore going to have within
itself
the carbon the oxygen and the metals
and so on that were around at the time
it formed
and those get built in large stars
that explode as supernovae and
distribute their contents around to form
new generations of stars
as we were just saying they live fast
and die young but they make
heavy elements in the process but
barnard star being so old is
stuck with a heavier element content
that was around back in the day
8 to 12 billion years ago and
the chance of having any rocky planets
with metal cores like the earth
seems somewhat diminished because the
planets will have been formed out of the
same
cloud of material that formed the star
and so if there are any they're
reasonably likely to
be gas giants made of hydrogen and
helium
rather than necessarily rocky
it's not out of the question that there
could be enough material there to form
a few small rocky planets or at least
planetary cores
but it's always been a bit of a question
and it very much depends on whether
barnard star is eight
or 12 billion years old because the
the difference would have made a lot of
uh
opportunity for more of the heavier
elements to be present in the
original nebula
but back in the 1960s a dutch astronomer
called peter van der kamp
uh was very famous for studying
barnard's star
and tracking its proper motion across
the sky
looking to see if he could detect any
sideways movement
as well as the linear movement of it
and he claimed that he had and he
attributed this
to the discovery of
at least one and in fact later
two planets orbiting around barnard's
star
the idea being that a planet
orbiting a star is pulled into the orbit
by
the mass of the star but the planet
pulls back
and causes the star to wobble around in
a little tiny orbit
um all of its own in a little tiny
circle often that circle is
smaller than the size of the star but
nevertheless
um if you had a particularly small star
and a large planet
then it might be enough to deflect the
path of the
star across the sky such that we could
measure it
that was peter's idea and
indeed he chose wisely because
barnard star is a very low mass star
with very apparent proper motion so
he's a good candidate to try because
with a low mass star
you don't need such a large planet to
make a noticeable effect
there's initial uh suggestion from his
data was that he'd found
a planet 1.6 times the mass of jupiter
orbiting at 4.4 astronomical units
so that's uh
very much in an almost jupiter-like
orbit
and such a large planet would indeed be
plausible as causing
a noticeable wobble perhaps in the
movement of the star later on he revised
it to two planets
one of 1.1 jupiter masses
and one at 0.8 jupiter masses
and his data that he was going on was
his tracking of the position
from 1950 to 1980
or 1975 of his uh
measurements of the position in both the
celestial longitude the right ascension
coordinate
and the celestial latitude declination
coordinate and you can see his marked
little circles there
going along in time and uh with the five
year intervals marked
and if indeed there was a planet there
you would expect it to cause the
star to move backwards and forwards in a
sinusoidal pattern
as viewed from the direction of the
earth
and that looks very much like what we've
got here with
an 11 year period or thereabouts
11 years between the peaks and troughs
in the graph
unfortunately for peter nobody else
could ever reproduce
his findings it would have been the
first detection
of a planet around another star
if it had been confirmed but try as they
might other astronomers could not
reproduce this and eventually
after uh peter's death
the uh successor who took over
his observatory from him went and
reanalyzed all of the records and the
data
and realized that actually what you have
is data that fits a straight line
movement of the star up to that point
there
shown and another straight line
there and a third straight line
here and the reason for suspecting that
this is what is going on
is because in 1962 the
telescope engineers came along and took
the telescope to pieces
to do maintenance and put it back
together
and you know what i'm going to say they
came back 10 years later and did it
again
and this created a misalignment each
time
in the telescope which
created the effect of
changing the slope of the lines that
peter
thought he was measuring so this rather
explained why he was getting the
readings he was getting
and nobody else could find it so i'm
afraid that
neither of vanderkamp's planets were
ever confirmed
but i'm happy to say that it made the
news
in 2018 and
this is an extract from the bbc website
where planet barnard b was confirmed
and it's not one of van der kamp's
planets i hasten to add
but it is a planet orbiting around
barnard's star
and uh at the time that made it uh
one of the closest uh planets that we
know of
still second only to proxima
centauri b which was discovered
just a few years before and we
estimated initially the the mass was
round about
3.2 times the mass of the earth so
an interesting size of planet slightly
bigger than the earth but nowhere near
the size
of even the things like jupiter or
saturn or even neptune
so its orbit around the
star was worked out and it orbits around
in 233 days
at a distance of 0.4
astronomical units 1a u is the distance
to the earth
from our sun so we've got the solar
system
by comparison at the top there with the
inner planets mercury venus earth and
mars
and planet b as it's called
rather unexciting name orbits around
barnard star roughly at the same
distance that mercury
does from the sun and it takes 233 days
which by coincidence is roughly how long
venus takes to orbit around the sun so
they shares characteristics with each of
those in some
sense
now of course in terms of the
environmental conditions on such a
planet
it might be close in but the star itself
you'll remember
is only putting out one 2 500th
of the energy of our sun so it's
very very dim and not much heat coming
off
it if we actually look at the different
types of stars
you can see how the amount of energy and
the wavelength at which it's emitted
changes
according to the mass of the star so
these little tiny red dwarfs this would
be a very cool red dwarf indeed
at 2 300. the light curve for those
goes as in the orange here into the red
where we start to see it invisible
already declining though through to the
blue end and then stops in the early
part of the ultraviolet part of the
spectrum
with the peak is in the infrared
whereas the sun has its peak
right in the middle of the green and
it's no surprise that our eyes are
sensitive to
the region where the sun is brightest
the natural consequence of evolution
also because the atmosphere happens to
let those wavelengths through though
and the hotter stars the peak moves even
further to the left
to higher energy and shorter wavelengths
on this
diagram and so actually a lot of the
energy
coming from the star is in the form of
heat the infrared radiation
but we can calculate things about how
much
heat a planet will receive at different
distances from
various types of stars and you can
evaluate what's called the goldilocks
zone
or the habitable zone where it's not too
hot not too cold
just right and when we say just right we
mean just right for
water to exist on the surface so
temperatures in the range
0 to 100 degrees centigrade
now for a sun-like star the habitable
zone is
arguably just beyond venus to
just about the orbit of mars with earth
nicely placed in the middle
it's too hot further in where mercury is
and probably too hot where venus is
for hottest stars still that extends
further out and the uh
this hypothetical hotter star here would
have mars
in its habitable zone if that was the
distribution of planets around it
but for the cool red dwarf stars
obviously the habitable zone is further
in
so the question really is is is
barnard b in the goldilocks zone
well there's a rather technical plot of
its orbit
and it's slightly elliptical um the
goldilocks zone is marked and it goes
from
0.05 astronomical units to 0.12
astronomical units which is very close
to the star indeed
due to this very very low uh power
output one 2
500th of the power of the sun remember
in fact the snow line is marked at
0.15 of an au that's the point at which
uh any uh planet would have a natural
temperature below
zero degrees and so water would be in
the form
frozen up as ice or snow and indeed
indeed
soon drops as you go further away to
bringing things like ammonia which uh
has
a melting point of minus 33 degrees
centigrade
that would also soon turn to a liquid
uh and indeed start snowing out
so barnard b it orbits actually well
beyond the
snow line and is in elliptical orbit
going from
0.27 to 0.53 of an astronomical unit
so 0.4 is the average so it warms up a
little bit
as it comes in and then goes out to
much colder temperatures when it uh
reaches
its uh far point from the sun at half an
au
so it's not in the habitable goldilocks
zone itself
and they've classified it as a
non-habitable planet
for that reason
it's also though beyond the tidal lock
limit
the moon is tidally locked to the earth
it always keeps one face pointing
towards us
and this happens with any object
orbiting its primary within a certain
radius and the
tidal lot radius for barnard star is
just a quarter of an au
so barnard b avoids that
now tidal lock is a little bit of a a
conundrum for planets because
they would get very hot on one side and
freezing cold on the other
with maybe a temperate region in between
so it's not something that you really
want to happen and it's a problem for a
lot of
red dwarf stars if we plot the habitable
zone here for different types of star
here
so for the smallest red dwarfs the
habitable zone is here and it gradually
gets further away
as the star gets hotter and the tidal
lock distance
is here so actually most red dwarfs
have their habitable zone inside the
tidal lock radius
which is certainly going to make
environmental conditions
rather complicated if not impossible
you'd probably get either too hot or too
cold unless you were
managing to sit in some sort of
temperate zone
near the poles or something the k
type stars they're all right they have
their habitable zones
outside the tidal lot radius um and
k-type stars are very good candidate for
finding habitable planets
for that reason and the sun well the
sun's a g-type up here so
not a problem you can see mercury's on
the boundary of tidal lock and it does
indeed
have a tidal lock relationship with the
sun
it's a bit of a complicated one
but barnard's planet b was discovered
not by the method that peter van der
kamp was using
of looking at the movement of the
star itself but by the radial velocity
method
which is to look for the change in the
spectral
line shift caused by the
to and fro motion of the star as it goes
round in its tiny little orbits
perturbed by the gravity of the
unseen companion and
the light will be shifted towards the
blue
if the stars coming towards you and into
the red if it's
moving away from you and we can detect
that change
very very much more accurately than you
could ever hope to plot the position
of the star on the sky so it's a much
more subtle technique
but it has an interesting drawback which
is that
it only measures the movement along the
line of sight
caused by the the companion planet
and by virtue of some mathematics here
with the the diagram shown on the right
if the orbit of the planet is tilted
compared to the line of sight so it's
not
orbiting in the same plane as our
viewpoint towards the star is
pointing then we only see part of the
movement
and the more tilted it is the worse that
gets
this means that we underestimate the
mass of the planet
so the mass that we give of 3.2
earth masses is a minimum mass
estimate assuming the planet is in an
orbit completely in the plane
of the line of sight the more tilted it
is the more of an underestimate
that is going to be and until we are
able to
find other methods for spotting the
planets
working out the tilt we're not going to
be able to resolve that
so this means it could be a 3.2
earth mass planet or it could be
considerably
heavier in fact it could be up to about
earth masses and so there are two
real possible candidates it could be at
the smaller end of that mass range
3.2 to maybe seven earth masses
that would be classed as a super earth
and at the distance it would be beyond
the snow line
it would certainly have a lot of water
and ammonia and other ices
rained out and frozen out onto its uh
surface
and be able to hold on to those uh
against the radiation pressure from the
sun
uh from the the star rather from barnard
star
and have a very thick steamy and
watery envelope in general
at the higher end of the mass range
though in the sort of eight to twelve
earth masses it would be more of a mini
neptune
because it would now have gravity strong
enough
to hang on to the even more volatile
elements
hydrogen and helium and there's a lot of
that around
three quarters of all the atoms in the
universe are hydrogen and
nearly one quarter helium so if you can
hang on to those then you certainly
would soon form into a gas giant planet
or a even a mini gas giant as is
the possibility here a mini neptune
so it very much depends on the tilt of
the orbit
from our point of view as to which of
those is likely to be the right answer
but we can have some fun speculating
we know it's at least 3.2 so if we
assume it's around about that and that
we're
looking at the thing more or less edge
on
then it would still be a super earth
planet it would have stronger
surface gravity be about one and a half
times the
pull of gravity standing on the surface
there
and it certainly should hang on to a
certain amount of atmosphere
heat from the star itself would
naturally give it
a temperature though of minus 170
degrees
centigrade very chilly indeed
but with a thick atmosphere held in
place
by stronger gravity containing
lots of things like carbon dioxide or
methane or other molecules
in fact carbon dioxide would probably be
freezing out at this temperature
wouldn't it
but uh a thick atmosphere could
nevertheless create a greenhouse effect
that would boost that temperature
up um to a much more respectable level
um the earth's temperature is already
boosted by
something like 40 degrees just with our
atmosphere
when we look at venus we find its
temperature is boosted
all the way up to 450 degrees c
by its atmosphere so it's entirely
plausible that
a thick atmosphere on a super earth
could
bring that temperature up into the
positive
degree celsius region
and if so it might have interesting uh
potential for weird forms of alien life
on it
that if the temperature is temperate
one because of the thick atmosphere you
might see
barnard star as a very faint red glow in
the sky
through the thick clouds would only be
at best
about as bright as a hundred times our
full moon
and people have done a lot of
speculating and
what if scenarios about this and think
that
maybe you know you might have some sort
of weird vegetation here
which is picking up the red light only
and the plants might be completely black
in order to try and
absorb as much energy coming from the
star as possible
to keep themselves warm and to
grab all those photons for
photosynthesis purposes etc
but of course this is all highly
speculative
now another factor in favor of it though
is geothermal heating
if you have a large planet a super earth
then you probably trapped a lot more
heat in the center during the
formation process you you've gathered
together three and a half times the mass
you've therefore gathered together three
and a half times
the amount of heat in the core
either from the heat of formation of the
planet from the accretion process
or from the radioactive elements that
you will have trapped
and so if you do have a rocky planet it
will have kept
a very large amount of that heat within
itself
and because larger objects
have more volume compared to their
surface area
than small ones do they leak for heat to
space
more slowly and so even though this
planet might be 8 to 12 billion years
old
it would still probably have enough heat
to have volcanic activity filling the
atmosphere with all those
greenhouse gases and also
a liquid core which would
if the planet was spinning on its axis
at a reasonable speed
which it probably is because it's not
tidally locked to the star
so that's where the tidal locking factor
comes in again
then you probably have a very powerful
magnetic field
and that would be sufficient to protect
the atmosphere from the
direct effects of the solar wind coming
from barnard star
and so the atmosphere would probably
survive
that's very much the case as the earth's
atmosphere is protected here from the
worst effects
of the solar wind
another possibility is that being a
warmer
environment like that it might have
enormous amounts of liquid water on the
surface
having floated up to the top over its
rocky core
and it might be like a giant version of
jupiter's moon europa
with a rocky core with a metallic inner
core probably molten
volcanic activity bringing that heat
into the surface but dumping it
not out into the atmosphere directly but
into a liquid ocean that might be a
hundred
or a thousand kilometers deep and that
might take it
well up to uh high altitudes where it
would then
perhaps be covered in an ice layer
at the outer surface depending upon what
atmosphere it had above it
so there are lots and lots of
possibilities for this and
in coming years we're hopefully going to
be able to start to answer some of these
questions
that's not the only planet that has been
uh hinted at though
a barnard c has also featured
to in the recent papers being suggested
as orbiting further out than barnard b
and even
further more frigid world we're not
certain of its existence we're
more than 99 certain of barnard b
but uh barnard c at the moment remains a
wobble in the data
and it hasn't yet been confirmed
but what we do know from other studies
is
that we can rule out various
possibilities
there are no planets that are
eight tenths the mass of jupiter or
bigger
um that we can say there's a
maximum mass for any planets and we've
also been able to rule out
any planets that are roughly earth-sized
in the habitable zone anything
more than about 70 percent of the mass
of the earth we would have already
detected
if it was that close in because it would
cause a larger and more frequent
wobbling which we would be able to find
so there are planets around barnard star
probably at least two but maybe there
aren't very many
deep inside in the inner reaches
or if they are they're likely to be very
small ones
and that fits with the lack of potential
lack of
rocky material to build the planets out
of so
maybe these are indeed mini neptunes
one way that we might find out is that
later on this year the james webb
space telescope is going to be launched
in october and one of its first
science goals is to directly image the
system
and look to see if it can directly take
photographs
of barnard b
and if it can then we should also be
able to do spectroscopy
on it and start to learn about the
composition of the atmosphere
we'll also get an estimate of the size
of it and therefore
be able to start to make more
intelligent guesses about the mass
and track if we can track the orbit
in three dimensions then we can solve
the mass exactly
now another aspect that's always been
speculated about with barnard's star
is as a destination candidate
for an interstellar mission and in
particular
you may remember the daedalus proposal
which was to send a spacecraft
out all the way to barnard's star
and the idea would be to use nuclear
power to
accelerate the spacecraft
to very high speeds over a period of
four years it would achieve 12 percent
of the speed of light
and by doing so it would be able to fly
to barnard's star in just 50 years
absolutely enormous spacecraft
compared to the saturn 5 here and the
proposal is not to build it
on the earth and launch it that would
just not be feasible
but to build it in sections and probably
build it out in the asteroid belt
uh or possibly in earth orbit but
more likely to mine the materials from
asteroids and build it in in that region
from the raw materials that are
available there otherwise we'll be
perpetually carrying fuel everywhere
to take things to and from it
here's a diagram of the the idea it's a
two-stage
unit uh both
powered by nuclear power they have
propellant tanks
and then they eject small elements
of nuclear fuel into
the bell-shaped reaction chamber at the
back
and ignite it using uh
lasers or electron beams to
trigger the nuclear fusion process and
accelerate the thing forward and then of
course
once the large tanks on the first stage
there are exhausted they'll ditch that
bit
and fly the second part across are
accelerating even further
right at the nose of the spacecraft you
can see a beryllium
disc this is because if you're traveling
at 12
the speed of light even crashing into
the thin
interstellar gas is going to be
quite a dangerous process
and so this is an armored disc on the
front there to try
to take the hit of
driving through that gas at enormous
speed
this is how the engine would work we've
got uh
the fuel is not heavy fit elements like
uranium but
it's going to use fusion power and fuse
hydrogen
which is injected from the front
uh forced into being a plasma by
electron beams and contained by the
magnetic field so very much like the
fusion reactor
that we're trying to build on the earth
but
in this case we don't have to contain
the fuel
forever what we actually want to do is
get it very very hot
and then have it fly out the nozzle at
the back at enormous speed
the rocket equation that governs
how rocket all rocket engines work no
matter what the fuel
is that the exhaust velocity of your gas
is everything the faster the material
comes out the back the more you can
accelerate
and it doesn't matter what it's made of
or how massive it is really
and so such an engine can achieve a very
very
efficient uh use of fuel and
is the really the only way that we're
going to get a rocket engine to
reach those sorts of speeds
now if you'd were to be able to travel
all the way out to barnard's star
and turn around and have a look back
this is part of the sky
map that you would be able to draw and
the difference
is minimal we see the familiar things
like orion with orion's belt here
sirius bright star procyon
the twins of gemini and so forth but
there would be one extra bright star
in orion and that would be the sun as a
first magnitude star
um just uh shining back at
us all the other stars would seem to
have hardly moved
the nearest other stars to barnard star
are of course
alpha centauri and the sun and
the other red dwarf star that was on one
of the charts earlier
ross154 so very much has the same
perspective
on things looking from bernard stars as
we would do
so i wonder will we ever
manage to get to enough
material and organization together to
build such a giant probe and send it
there
or will it be things like the
breakthrough star shot project
which plans to use laser beams
sent from the earth to accelerate small
spacecraft with micro electronics on
them
that are propelled by the impact of the
laser beam on a light sail
and to send those out in swarms out to
destinations such as alpha centauri and
barnard star
and again they could possibly report
back in
a few tens of years even because they
could accelerate to half the speed of
light with that technology
well i don't know
and just to wrap up we've got a few
minutes left
i thought i'd add a little bit about a
newly discovered red dwarf star
that may turn out to become quite famous
only discovered in 2003
and had a very large proper motion
again five arc seconds that's in the top
ten
of uh stars for their proper motion
across the sky
half the value of barnard's star and
indeed it's twice as far away 12 light
years
that makes it very very dim and very
hard to observe at magnitude 15 so you
need a very large telescope to
be able to see it but what's interesting
about tea garden star is that
just in 2019 scientists
have announced the discovery of two
earth mass planets
and these really are earth mass ones
t-garden b orbits inside
what's described as the optimistic
habitable zone
so the equivalent in the solar system
would be somewhere between
venus which is too hot on earth which is
just right
so it's a little bit on the toasty side
and
tea garden c orbits on the outer edge of
what's described as the conservative
habitable zone that's the slightly too
cold region
similar to mars so we've got one that's
too hot and one that's too
cold but none that are just right
however we probably haven't found them
all yet
there may be others yet to discover
and so the search for all of these
planets around these red dwarf stars
continues and we do seem to be finding
more and more of them
the more we look which is interesting
because
uh 10 years ago there was
quite a lot of doubt about whether red
dwarf stars would
have any planets at all and certainly if
they did that they would only be
tiny little asteroid like things rather
than
planets of the order of the mass of the
earth
they just felt that these stars wouldn't
have enough
mass in their proto-stellar discs to
form
families of planets and that's turning
out very much to be
not true so a very interesting
development
and i will bring it to a close there
thank you very much for listening
i hope you enjoyed that trip to barnard
star and back
even if we can't quite go there for real